Amortisation is a very important
accounting and financial concept,
but I have checked many times is
not well understood because it
is not well explained.
I wanted to dedicate a whole
class to this concept.
The first thing we have to do is
understand very well what amortisation
is, what is the logic, and then
what we will see is how it is calculated
and how we will use
it accounting.
I want you to understand why it is
amortised.
Think that or almost all companies
have fixed assets in their
balance sheet, such as a
vehicle, which each year
is losing value.
Assets have a useful life and at the
end of their useful life would be unusable.
Well, because amortization is the
mechanism we use for all years
to assign a accounting expenditure
that goes depreciating in our
balance sheet that asset.
In this case, in the example we
are seeing, we will amortise the
vehicle in 5 years.
It is a vehicle that we initially
have accounted for because it has
a value of 50,000 euros.
What is what we do?
Every year we pay 10,000 euros
in the results account, in the
results state, because we assign
that accounting expenditure.
We are looking at the results,
we are paying 10,000 euros
a year.
We are amortising this asset.
In addition, as the asset, in this
case the car, is losing value every
year, we have to reflect it
also in the balance of situation
on the part of the asset.
And what we do is use an account
called cumulative amortisation
in which we accumulate,
as we see, 10,000, 20.000,
30.000, 40,000, we accumulate
depreciation.
And we can see it in the situation
balance that originally in the year
0 we have a vehicle whose net
accounting value is 50,000 euros.
As years pass, year 1, year 2, year
3, we will be reducing that cumulative
amortisation and the net value
of the asset will decrease
until at the end of its useful
life will be 0.
There is one very important thing
you have to consider
regarding amortizations.
And it is that amortizations are a accounting
expenditure, yes, but they have
no effect on the treasury.
Usually the expenses lead to
a treasury exit.
You buy something, you pay it and it has
an effect on the box.
But not the amortisation.
As we have seen, this vehicle
has been depreciating every year
and we have, as we can see, in the
state of treasury we have taken
into account.
We account for it as a cost.
But really something comes out of
the company's box.
Do we pay for it every year?
No to.
Amortisation, as we have seen, has
no effect on treasury and does not
respond to any actual or objective fact.
This is a accounting expenditure.
And as such, it affects
the profits we report and the
taxes to pay.
As we have seen above, the general
accounting plans of each country
recommend or determine the time limits
within which you can amortise
an asset.
In this case, for example, we
have part of the table of amortisation
coefficients in the Spanish
General Accounting Plan.
What I am going to do is that accountants
have a certain margin, some
freedom to play with the depreciation
and depreciation part and influence
gross profit and therefore
taxes and the outcome
of the exercise.
And how?
If your goal is
to pay less, what
do you do?
Do you increase the amortisation
rate by advancing the amortisations
in a specific period?
Therefore, if you spend more, the
gross profit is lower and the
tax payments you pay that year
will be lower.
Are you interested in the opposite?
What do you want is to report a
result of exercising a greater
profit?
Well, we do exactly the opposite.
We amortise assets in a longer
term, say we delay the
amortisation, we give a lower expenditure
and thus a higher income.
Let us take an example with two
companies.
In both cases, the company has an
asset valued at 50,000 euros.
In the case of the company, in the
first case, we will amortise the property
in two years.
The annual expenditure
is 25,000 euros.
If you have a life of 40,000, you will
have a 25 and you will have
a gross profit of 15.
So, you pay the corporate
tax of 3,000.
In the second scenario, it is the
same asset, which happens that instead
of amortizing the good in two years
we will amortize it in 10.
The amount of money we spend
is less than 5,000.
We make the same rest, $40,000
minus an annual amortisation
of 5,000 we have a gross
profit of 35.000, which as we
see is much higher than the other
scenario.
Of course, being a greater gross profit
we will pay more taxes and the outcome
of the exercise will be greater.
As you can see, there is a certain
margin or flexibility to play with
the amortisations and to influence
on magnitudes that are very
important, such as taxes or as
the outcome of the exercise.
To finish, and as we have
already mentioned other
times, an MBA student has to be
an expert in the global business
world.
You cannot be an expert in
your country.
Therefore, you must have at
least a basic knowledge of
how terms are used in different
parts of the world.
And I want you to know that
in the U.S. accounting regulations
the concepts of amortization
and depreciation are used
in some slightly different way.
The philosophy underlying is exactly
what we have explained.
Amortisation is used for intangible
assets and depreciation
is used for tangible
assets.
While we in today's class
have only used the term
amortisation but that
is used for both intangible
assets and tangible
assets.